**Disclaimer:** This post is opinionated, please take it with a grain of
salt and make your own judgement call.

Why should I care about BuckleScript?
=====================================

BuckleScript is designed for large scale programming under JavaScript
platform.

Its goal is not just running OCaml programs under JavaScript platform,
but also to try to bring all Javascript developer tools to the OCaml
ecosystem, while bringing the type safety and expressiveness of OCaml
languages to the Javascript developer community.

If you are interested in compilation-time cost that existing Javascript
transpilers ([babel](https://babeljs.io/),
[buble](http://buble.surge.sh/) or
[traceur](https://github.com/google/traceur-compiler)) suffer from or
projects like [typescript](https://www.typescriptlang.org/),
[Elm](http://elm-lang.org/), or [Purescript](http://www.purescript.org/)
we think you will probably be interested in BuckleScript as well.

BuckleScript is not a new language. It reuses the existing [OCaml
programming language](https://ocaml.org/) while still delivering
debug-able and performant JavaScript code. We think it’s better to reuse
than having to invent a new language.

We think it’s important that BuckleScript compiles **much faster** than
existing transpilers, generates **more efficient code** while keeping
its Javascript output **readable**.

When in production mode, BuckleScript will aggressively eliminate dead
code at the module level - more than just
[tree-shaking](http://www.2ality.com/2015/12/webpack-tree-shaking.html),
it will analyze the program to do a
[purity](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pure_function) analysis and
eliminate anything that doesn’t have side-effects. On the global level,
it produces code that is readily optimized by linker/bundlers such as
the [Google Closure
Compiler](https://developers.google.com/closure/compiler/).

Unlike most transpiled languages, BuckleScript generates **much smaller
code** than hand-written Javascript, eliminating the need to split your
libraries into small pieces like as done in
[lodash](https://github.com/lodash/lodash) - we think this should be the
compiler and linker’s job.

How does it compare with other transpilers?
===========================================

1.  It’s OCaml, and we think Ocaml is awesome. The OCaml language is
    actually, **really close** to JavaScript after
    [type-erasure](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Type_erasure). Take
    [purescript](http://www.purescript.org/) which is designed to
    generate readable Javascript for example, it’s essentially
    [Haskell](https://www.haskell.org/) with strict evaluation
    semantics. If we just use OCaml instead, we don’t need invent a new
    language, since it already offers many of the benefits of Haskell,
    and has a strict evaluation order by default (one of the key
    differences from Haskell). Moreover, as alluded to, by its full
    name — Objective Caml, OCaml provides built-in support for Object
    Oriented programming. OCaml’s [structural
    typing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Structural_type_system) and
    [row-polymorphism](https://www.cl.cam.ac.uk/teaching/1415/L28/rows.pdf)
    captures the flexibility of Javascript programs very
    well — structural typing is a formalized way of duck-typing. As
    opposed to Haskell, OCaml does not have an (in our opinion) abstruse
    way of [supporting
    side-effects](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/2488646/why-are-side-effects-modeled-as-monads-in-haskell),
    in fact, while it encourages functional programming in general, it
    natively supports straightforward imperative programming and
    Object-Oriented programming when you really need it. As a practical
    programmers, we find this to be a big deal: While we prefer
    programming in a functional style in general, we realize there are
    some cases that an imperative style makes perfect sense.

2.  BuckleScript is not just OCaml, but the whole OCaml ecosystem

The OCaml compiler implementation(s) are famous for blazing fast compile
times, and as programmer, we think compile times really matter and are a
very important feature of a compiled language.

    ![./dist/images/compile-time.png](./dist/images/compile-time.png)

The above picture compares OCaml compilation-times with other languages:
S for Scala, K for Koltin, TS for TypeScript.

BuckleScript reuses most of the OCaml compiler (parsing/type checking
and pattern match compilation), its type checker [was well
engineered](http://okmij.org/ftp/ML/generalization.html) and written in
an imperative style to make it fast.

Before BuckleScript, there already existed an [OCaml to JS
compiler](./Differences-from-js_of_ocaml.adoc). BuckleScript stands on
the shoulders of such excellent tools. For example, from the very
beginning, much like Js\_of\_ocaml, BuckleScript has an assembly
backend, which we use for the best performance in our development
environment and our
[playground](http://bucklescript.github.io/bucklescript-playground/) to
deliver the software to more people without installation - compared with
Elm, Purescript, or typescript, none of which support both an ASM
backend and a JS backend.

1.  BuckleScript is an optimizing compiler and will do much more in the
    future.

Since OCaml has a sound type system, and functional languages are
generally easier to optimize, unlike typescript, we’ve already done lots
of optimizations for efficient Javascript output, and envision much more
in the future.

Here’s a naive example to demonstrate the capabilities of BuckleScript:

The following OCaml code:

    let test () =
      let m = ref IntMap.empty in
      let count = 1000000 in
      for i = 0 to count do
        m := IntMap.add i i !m
      done;
      for i = 0 to count do
        ignore (IntMap.find i !m)
      done

    let () = test()

Generates the following output code:

    function test() {
      var m = /* Empty */0;
      for(var i = 0; i<= 1000000; ++i){
        m = add(i, i, m);
      }
      for(var i$1 = 0; i$1<= 1000000; ++i$1){
        find(i$1, m);
      }
      return /* () */0;
    }

    test(/* () */0);

We re-wrote the example using using Facebook’s
[immutable](http://facebook.github.io/immutable-js/) library for
JavaScript

    'use strict';
    var Immutable = require('immutable');
    var Map = Immutable.Map;
    var m = new Map();
    var test = function() {
      var count = 1000000;
      for(var i = 0; i < count; ++i) {
        m = m.set(i, i);
       }
      for(var j = 0; j < count; ++j) {
        m.get(j);
        }
    }

    test();

Now we compare the runtime performance:

-   BuckleScript Immutable Map: 1186ms

-   Facebook Immutable Map: 3415ms

We also compare code Size:

-   BuckleScript (Prod mode): 899 Bytes

-   Facebook Immutable: 55.3K Bytes

How is it faster than hand-written JS code?
===========================================

It’s hard to explain JS performances in general, however, we will
explain some of the optimizations we’ve done. For example, in OCaml,
`Map` is like C++ templates, i.e. it will be instantiated by a
comparison function, like below:

    module IntMap = Map.Make(struct
      type t = int
      let compare (x : int) y = compare x y
      end
    )

In BuckleScript, this instantiation happens at compile time instead of
at runtime, thereby improving the performance. Moreover, the data
representation or encoding of types is also optimized for speed.
Consider the following example:

    (** Map.t *)
    type 'a t =
      | Empty
      | Node of 'a t * key * 'a * 'a t * int

Since there are only two branches in this [algebraic data
type](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Algebraic_data_type), `Empty` will
be simply encoded as `0 /* Empty */` (with comments for readable output)
and `Node(l, x, data, r, height)` will be encoded as
`/*Node*/ [l,x,data,r,height]`. Arrays are
[faster](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/17295056/array-vs-object-efficiency-in-javascript)
for most operations when compared to objects.

Other optimizations like [tail call
conversion](http://stackoverflow.com/questions/310974/what-is-tail-call-optimization),
inline and [constant
propagation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Constant_folding) are also
introduced.

How does it reduce generated code size?
=======================================

We do three levels of dead code elimination. At the module and function
levels, BuckleScript will try to find dead code and remove unused values
and side-effect free expressions (local variables and functions). At the
linker/bundler level, BuckleScript can make use of existing bundlers and
even Google Closure Compiler or any existing bundler to do the global
analysis, because we produce code that conforms to the standard.

Even bucklescript runtime is written in OCaml itself, this means such
runtime can also benefit from dead code elimination.

There are other factors count, mostly code organized in functional style
are much easier to do the tree shaking while harder to remove for OO
style, OCaml’s standard library and runtime are organized in an
independent style, which also helps dead code removal.
